Pathfinder tool documentation
Vanilja Hyppönen

Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) simulations are one of the most important tools in the rapid sampling of simple reaction coordinates.
As a general rule, SMD simulations are done with ad hoc parameters for the forces that drive the simulation system from its starting state to an end state along with such reaction coordinates. 
As a result, the unphysiological forces are introduced into the system leading to strains and distortions that cause the sampled reaction path to deviate significantly from a more natural equilibrium path. 
To allay that issue, we will develop a new tool, Pathfinder, which systematically and algorithmically searches the path space by introducing the least amount of energy through external forces and performs relaxation simulations along the way. 
The relaxations themselves will be monitored in an automated way to check if the system has reached a state of relative equilibrium at a particular value of the reaction coordinate. 
Initially, the tool will be written for simpler reaction coordinates. 
6Once the proof of concept is established we will use machine learning tools to derive a reaction coordinate from the initial SMD simulations and adapt it along the reaction path to estimate a more collective reaction coordinate dynamically.

Preparations:
-mdp file
-pre-processing: solvation, box, energy minimization, equilibration etc.
-fill input.config
-import gromacs and python in mahti

Functions:

ask_continue
Inputs: -
Outputs: No output, but will either continue with the next iteration or exit the program.

Ask user if they wish to continue the simulations with the next iteration or quit.
Will be asked after each iteration after equilibration.

check_if_done
Inputs: -
Outputs: RES (0 for fail, 1 for success)

Function for checking if the best force constant is found. 
Best force constant means that the difference between the best K and the lower value of K is 5 (or less) and the simulation with the lower K failed. 
Therefore K_BEST is the smallest K possible that is 
still able to pull/push the desired distance.

cleanup
Inputs: Yes/No interactive user input
Outputs: -

Function for cleaning up unnecessary files. 
Asks the user if they wish to remove files from earlier unsuccessful simulations. 
Cleanup is recommended. 

new_K
Inputs: -
Outputs: -

Function for determining an array of new K values. 
Will check STATUS_ARRAY for successful force constants (K) and produce new array of K's of length 3 or 5. 
Will update STATUS_ARRAY also. Will find the smallest successful K and calculate 1 new
value of K between the successful K and the K from the previous index in the array. 
The K's will be rounded to the nearest multiple of 5.
Example:
K_ARRAY=(10 20 30)
K=20 and K=30 were successful.
Therefore the new K_ARRAY=(10 15 20), and a simulation for K=15 will be run.

read_config
Inputs: -
Outputs: -

Will read the input.config file and check that files are in correct formats and have correct amount of elements. 
Config file variables will be used in the script.

run_eq
Inputs: Domain and iteration
Outputs: -

Function for running equilibrations. Input domain means the abbreviation of the pulled/pushed domain e.g. TM for transmembrane domain. 
Iteration means the current step in the entire pulling of the domain. Both inputs will be used in file naming. 
Function will set up and run a flat-bottom equilibration, and after it's done the function will analyze if the system is equilibrated enough. 
This will happen by analyzing the rmsd slope. Will run eq again with longer wall time if not successful.

run_pull
Inputs: Iteration, K and domain
Outputs: -

Function for setting up a pulling simulation and running it. Uses K for setting force constant in the mdp file. Uses inputs also in file naming.

run_simulation
Inputs: Domain and number of iterations
Outputs: -

Big function for running the entire series of simulations. 
Calculates values for K, runs pulling simulations, checks their success, run equiulibrations etc.

status
Inputs: STATUS_ARRAY index, domain, K and iteration
Outputs: STATUS_ARRAY: 1 for success, 0 for fail

Function for determining if a pulling simulation with force constant K was successful.
Successful means it was able to pull/push 1nm (or other specified distance).

write_batch
Inputs: File name
Outputs: -

Function for writing a batch file for running pulling and equilibration simulations in CSCs Mahti.
Reads slurm variables from input file. File name is usually of type pull_${DOMAIN}${ITERATION}_$K










